<html>
<meta charset="utf-8">
<head>
  <title>The Public Office</title>
  <script type="text/javascript" src="file:///Users/vectorsize/Dropbox/www/dilettant/jekyll/_site/site.js"></script>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="file:///Users/vectorsize/Dropbox/www/dilettant/jekyll/_site/site.css">
</head>
<body>
  <nav class="main-nav">
    <ul>
      <li><a href="file:///Users/vectorsize/Dropbox/www/dilettant/jekyll/_site/index.html">Home</a></li>
      <li><a href="file:///Users/vectorsize/Dropbox/www/dilettant/jekyll/_site/docs.html">Docs</a></li>
<!--       <li><a href="file:///Users/vectorsize/Dropbox/www/dilettant/jekyll/_site/team.html">Team</a></li>
      <li><a href="file:///Users/vectorsize/Dropbox/www/dilettant/jekyll/_site/contact.html">Contact</a></li> -->
    </ul>
  </nav>
  <nav class="back"><a href="file:///Users/vectorsize/Dropbox/www/dilettant/jekyll/_site/docs.html">&larr; back to docs</a></nav>
<div class="content fixable"><h1 id='meeting_with_arkitekturmuseet_6_sept'>Meeting with Arkitekturmuseet 6 Sept.</h1>

<p>These are brief good-to-know-notes from todays meeting at Arkitekturmuseet. ToDos are in the Issues section of GitHub.</p>

<h3 id='our_contacts'>Our contacts</h3>

<p><strong>Magnus Ericson</strong>, coordinator design &amp; form – dialogue regarding tips on POMA design + dialogue partners: magnus.ericson@arkitekturmuseet.se</p>

<p><strong>Maria Östman</strong>, head of communications - regarding text material, press work, invitations, logos etc: maria.ostman@arkitekturmuseet.se</p>

<p><strong>Sandra Nolgren</strong>, programansvarig - regarding the public events: sandra.nolgren@arkitekturmuseet.se</p>

<p><strong>Stefan Mossfeldt</strong>, exhibition assistant &amp; technician: stefan.mossfeldt@arkitekturmuseet.se</p>

<p><strong>Monica Fundin Pourshahidi</strong>, head of public activities - our initial contact, not so much from now on: monica.pourshahidi@arkitekturmuseet.se</p>

<h3 id='design_of_the_space'>Design of the space</h3>

<p>We will compile ideas, proposals, questions, and set up a number of meetings with Magnus, for brainstorming and tips. We discussed involving students, companies etc.</p>

<h3 id='opening_event'>Opening event</h3>

<p>Sandra said that the museum are planning to host an event focusing on Pulicness (Allmänningar), and proposed that we do the event together with that as a theme. We were/are very positive to that idea – to have POMA introduced as part of a bigger issue/movement. This will also attract a larger/different crowd than if the whole event focuses on POMA. Our team and Sandra will brainstorm some ideas and Johan will get back to her about a meeting soon.</p>

<h3 id='arkitekturmuseet_turns_50'>Arkitekturmuseet turns 50</h3>

<p>10-11 November there will be birthday celebrations at the museum. We should know about this and discuss whether or not we would like to interact/use that event/crowd somehow. The main hoolabaloo will be on the Saturday.</p>

<h3 id='project_plan_and_contract'>Project Plan and contract</h3>

<p>We looked through their contract proposal and it looks fine. Johan will finish it and send it to Monica, and then send the invoice. We have to complete the plan with a Marketing plan, which should be dialogued with Mara Ö.</p>

<h3 id='hallbarstadse'>hallbarstad.se</h3>

<p>The museum is running a website – http://hallbarstad.se/ – Sustainable City, which we should check out. They will put info about POMA there.</p></div>
</body>
</html>