The vision of The Public Office is derived from observations and analyses of the contemporary labour market, characterized by increasing flexibility, mobility – and precarity. Starting from the notion of “workplacelessness”, it addresses the role of, and right to, workplace communality and democratic access to work and cooperative knowledge production. Further, the idea is addresses issues of local urban development, where we propose that public meeting places for knowledge sharing through work can play a key role in local development, as well as regarding health and environment.In this section we address and develop these starting points and perspectives. 

## Changes in the labour market {#changes_in_the_labour_market}

The labour markets are changing, and today there are obvious trends towards a growing proportion of freelance and precarious workers and single-person firms. Individuals and businesses are more geographically mobile than ever before, and with new communication technologies, many types of work can be done at any time and from anywhere.

As a result, work is increasingly carried out from homes, cafés, libraries and so on. This “workplacelessness” means that many people today lack access to the community, stability and skills development of a workplace.[(1)](#footnotes){#foot1} This situation calls for new types of political analyses and initiatives.

In many industries, long-term employment is a distant memory, and there are significant differences between the employee and the entrepreneur in terms of securities and benefits. Entrepreneurs are cherished in the political discourse, but there are few substantial efforts to improve the precarious situation that is implied by the “do-it-yourself” logic. The increased amount of small businesses and freelancers can at best lead to a greater variety of activities, and at worst, a negative competition that has implications for both quality, working environment and social security.[(2)](#footnotes){#foot2}

Running your own business or working freelance, with the flexibility and mobility that it can imply, is for many people a desirable situation. This work situation is often characterized by a strong commitment and a great possibility to influence how, when and where the work is conducted. At the same time, this freedom can lead to more complicated and precarious aspects such as uncertainty regarding future ventures and income, the feeling of always having to be available, more time spent on administration and budgeting, and a precarious existence in relation to the social support structures.

In this context, we believe that The Public Office has the potential to contribute to better conditions for running small enterprises by offering continuity, as well as by gathering and sharing competence, networks and experience. The accessibility of the offices could contribute in a practical way to putting people in contact, and promoting collaboration and learning. As the possibilities for finding a job are increasingly depending on social structures, informal networks and continuous further education, The Public Office is an effort to democratize the opportunities for work and development. In this way, The Public Office could become part of larger efforts and processes of social integration.

For many people, having a workplace would also make it easier to separate work from personal life; to be able to go to – and leave – the workplace can contribute to a more concentrated working situation. Another important aspect is that The Public Office can provide a common context for people feeling the pressure to learn and do everything – e.g. the administrative, economic, and organizational work – themselves. There is considerable knowledge and information that is currently lost, that “escapes”, due to a shortage of functioning forums for sharing outside of informal networks.

We believe that being part of and having access to community is essential for constructing an image of oneself as capable of influencing one's own situation and a larger context. Many freelance and precarious workers admit to a sense of isolation, and a difficulty in establishing oneself in new environments. This is especially valid for graduates, unemployed, people who have recently arrived in a new country or city, or who for other reasons lack access to relevant networks. In this regard, The Public Office could offer continuity – socially as well as professionally – in that people who return to the space to work or study, gradually can get to know each other. 

Working side by side, without necessarily working on the same project, is a beneficial way to build skills, exchange information and access feedback, advice and support. The growing phenomena of “co-working” is perhaps the clearest evidence of the need for ways of working that counteract isolation. In a time when more professionals spend much of their time behind a computer and in digital environments, it is important to stress the significance of a spatial community; to take a break together with others, to discuss current issues as well as business and project ideas.


## Public meeting places and the right to work {#public_meeting_places_and_the_right_to_work}

In the contemporary welfare society, public spaces are provided, protected or subsidized – spaces where people can meet, sit down, take a walk, engage in educational and cultural activities etc. – without requiring a financial transaction in a direct sense. These spaces and places form an infrastructure that promotes equal opportunities for knowledge, political advocacy, culture, leisure and mobility.
In todays' city planning, there is a lack of common spaces for production and self-organized knowledge development, i.e. public places that are not focused on consumption of goods, services, culture or leisure, and that can constitute meeting places for everyone, without cost barriers. 
Public places have the potential, through their availability, to create environments where a variety of people can feel welcome. The idea of The Public Office suggests that the opportunities provided to citizens through The Right of Public Access, public schools, libraries, cultural centres etc., should also cover the spatial and physical aspects of people’s working lives, given the development of labour markets and changes in the forms of work outlined above. In this situation, it is relevant to apply the following formulations of equal rights to work and fair working conditions:

> “Everyone has the right to just and favourable conditions of work, including remuneration that is reasonable and sufficient to provide families with an existence worthy of human dignity, and to equal pay for equal work. In addition, everyone should have secure and healthy working conditions and opportunities for promotion.”[(3)](#footnotes){#foot3}

We believe that the social and spacial dimensions of work should be related to the right to beneficial and fair working conditions. Inspired by examples from Germany and USA, we can imagine regulations that promote access to open workspaces and encourage public use of unused spaces.


## Public meeting places in local development {#public_meeting_places_in_local_development}

Many cities and municipalities have realized the need for different types of forums and meeting places, a need that is created in part by the increased mobility of people and businesses. Many municipalities are actively working to identify and develop strategies to create different types of contemporary meeting places. These venues are considered by many to be crucial for nourishing the local environment and making it more attractive.[(4)](#footnotes){#foot4}

The urban environment requires different types of milieus that create conditions for social interaction. Since the working life of many people today is characterized by social interaction and professional networking, it seems relevant to develop accessible, social environments for work. Thus The Public Office could assist people and businesses, perhaps new to a city or city district, to more quickly find community and build connections. 

Many municipalities and city districts are working hard to attract businesses and companies to establish themselves in their respective neighbourhoods. Rather than working to attract new businesses, The Public Office aims to provide space for the flows and activities that already exist. In many neighbourhoods there are workers, small businesses, artists, NGOs and activities that are not visible, because the work is carried out in homes or in cafés. Local Public Offices would provide a framework that can be filled by existing local actors, which in turn would stimulate the local environment by becoming visible, by coming together, and by interacting. The Public Office thus has the potential of functioning as a catalyst for opportunities for collaboration and innovation amongst a shared community setting.

Public Offices could potentially contribute to sustainable local economic development by reducing transaction costs for work and communal sharing of knowledge, as well as democratic access to meeting and networks. The idea rests heavily on values of sharing resources, both tangible and intangible. Inspired by phenomena such as collaborative consumption, co-working, Open Source, “maker spaces” and “fablabs”, The Public Office promotes efficient use of resources through sharing. This, we believe, is a key to sustainable local economy, and a necessary balance between the contradictory political incentives for reduced consumption in the name of sustainability, and increased consumption in the name of economy.

An important issue regarding increased attractiveness and quality of life in a city or in a neighbourhood, is gentrification. [(5)](#footnotes){#foot5} The Public Office is expected to have positive effects on the local community and quality of life in a neighbourhood, but must not contribute to a process where the less affluent need to move away due to raised living costs and upper classes moving in. Our assessment of the matter is that as long as Public Offices constitute a public domain, free and open to all, they should not significantly promote gentrification, as this process is partly based on financial exclusion and inaccessibility to some groups. The objective is thus a sustainable and positive development for the residents in the area, regardless of economic status and capacity.

## Work, health and environment {#work_health_and_environment}

It is a common view that work in itself is good for health, and that unemployment correspondingly leads to poorer health. With the currently strong political and social focus on work, it is relevant to look at it from several perspectives. Good health in employment can be traced to components related to work, such as collegial community, access to knowledge and development, timeframes and regular meals – but it is not necessarily the work itself that contributes to better health. Similarly, it is not necessarily unemployment itself that promotes poorer health, but rather economic problems, lack of community and stimulation. It has even been shown that unsafe and precarious working conditions are more adverse to health than unemployment. [(6)](#footnotes){#foot6} From this perspective, Public Offices could contribute to well-being by offering access to the above mentioned factors usually associated with employment, whether the user is employee, freelancer, student, unemployed or retired. Of additional importance in this context is the function of the physical meeting and workplace, that plays an even greater role as people are less tied to specific locations.

Other aspects regarding health are issues of empowerment in relation to self-organized, cooperative learning experiences. The Public Office as an idea has confidence in people's own capacity and creativity in learning from each other, from their own desires and in their own ways. It is our hope that The Public Office in this way could promote knowledge exchange and initiatives at the grassroots level, and thereby contribute to human, open and invigorating alternatives to more hierarchical and strictly standardized learning processes such as some current labour market programs, incubators, etc.. Contacts and knowledge can thus grow organically, based on the users' own initiatives and long-term continuity.

An issue that involves both health and the environment is that of commuting. Many of us spend a lot of time traveling to and from work, either because we lack the ability to choose where we can live in relation to where we can work, or on the contrary, that we can choose where we want to live, even though it is far from work. Since commuting is an unpaid part of work, this phenomenon has different economic implications for different groups. Studies show that longer commuting, i.e. more than 45 minutes each way, often has more negative implications for the economy and the possibility of full-time employment for women than for men, and for families with children compared to adults without children.

Furthermore, it is possible to see trends regarding health, namely that the amount of time we spend traveling to and from work has an effect on our mental well-being and perceived quality of life. People who commute more than an hour one way experience insomnia and negative stress to a greater extent than others. Commuting is also perceived as more negative by people who for economic reasons have had to move to a cheaper neighbourhood or city, than the people who have the economic means to choose where to live. [(7)](#footnotes){#foot7}  The issue of commuting is therefore a matter of social equity, and it appears urgent to promote ways of reducing the time we have to spend on travel to and from work. 

Imagining a future with Public Offices in many different neighbourhoods of a city or in a rural area at risk of depopulation or where people are forced to make long travels every day, is to imagine a situation where the potential of communication technology is fully utilized, where people can spend less time traveling, and still have access to workplace communality. In this prospective future it's possible that changing working patterns may contribute to the relief of the travel infrastructure, i.e. public transport and roads. Without becoming too optimistic, it is not impossible to imagine that a well-developed infrastructure of Public Offices could contribute to less debilitating movement patterns in the city, and to greater contact with the local neighbourhood.

Another major issue affecting the environment, is the sharing of resources. In this regard, The Public Office concept is inspired by ideas of collaborative consumption. [(8)](#footnotes){#foot8}  It is simply unsustainable for the environment for all people to own their own set of tools, work technology, means of communication and so on. Meanwhile, our current form of welfare economy depends on us to consume. Our hope in this matter is that Public Offices can facilitate resource sharing and thus reduce environmental impact, and to some extent increase the available disposable income for the users while raising the value of that which is created by using the space. 

<hr id="footnotes"/>

01. It is difficult to say exactly how widespread the "workplacelessness" is, and according to Statistics Sweden (Statistiska Centralbyrån) and the Work Environment Authority (Arbetsmiljöverket), there are no current statistics on the issue. [(up)](#foot1)
02. See Wikipedia's definition of [precarious work](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Precarious_work)
03. See [Right to work](http://www.manskligarattigheter.se/en/human-rights/what-rights-are-there/right-to-work). Quote from the Swedish government website on Human Rights. Published 17 April 2012, retrieved 12 July 2012. [(up)](#foot3)
04. See *Mötesplatser i Stockholmsregionen – Rapport 2:2010*, published by Regionplanekontoret Stockholms Läns Landsting (Office of Regional Growth, Environment and Planning) 2010. [(up)](#foot4)
05. See Wikipedia's definition of [gentrification](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gentrification) [(up)](#foot5)
06. Interview with Roland Paulsen, sociologist at Uppsala University, author of *Arbetssamhället (The Work Society – How work survived technology)*, 2010, Gleerups Education AB. The study referenced is Burgard, SA, Brand, JE & House, JS (2009): Perceived job insecurity and worker health in the United States, in Social Science & Medicine (69). [(up)](#foot6)
07. The studies on commuting referenced are summarized in Erika Sandows treatise [*On the road – Social aspects of commuting long distances to work*](http://www.avhandlingar.se/avhandling/a3da7332e9), 2011, Kulturgeografiska institutionen, University of Umeå. [(up)](#foot7)
08. See Wikipedia's definition of [collaborative consumption](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Collaborative_consumption) [(up)](#foot8)
