---
published: true
layout: global
title: summary
ref: summary
category: concept
---

The Public Office is a vision of open and rent-free work and meeting places, where people can engage in work and further education. These public workplaces are expected to contribute to local development, social cohesion and inclusion, better working conditions for freelance workers, short-term employees, small businesses and job seekers, as well as constitute a local meeting place for students, seniors and non-profit groups.

The concept of Public Offices is based on an analysis of the contemporary flexible and precarious labour markets, social segregation and economic inequality, and the need for common spaces for production and self-organized knowledge production. Further, it addresses the need in both (sub)urban neighbourhoods and small towns to create opportunities for small businesses and the civil sector, as well as for promoting local meeting places that can nourish the quality of life in a neighbourhood.

The Public Office is an infrastructural proposal and a political vision that seeks to meet the changing needs of the labour markets, characterized by a growing number of people working in their homes or in cafés, as well as an increased mobility and flexibility in the work. The foundation of the idea is the creation of cost free and democratically available structures and spaces for work, where people’s time and skills can be shared and enriched.

One aspect of the increasingly mobile work situation that is rarely addressed adequately, is a widespread “workplacelessness”, which means that many people today lack access to the community, continuity and skills development that workplaces can offer. The Public Office highlights the opportunities and values that can be generated by creating accessible places where people with varying skills and experiences can come together to work alongside each other.

Public places for meeting and exchange can facilitate new knowledge, networks and local communities. Accessible places for productive activity – i.e. not consumption – can lower the transaction costs for small businesses, flexible or precarious work, studies as well as social and non-profit engagement, and contribute to local engagement and encounters between people who would not meet otherwise. 

The aim of The Public Office project is to develop and propose organizational models for public workplaces than can be initiated by local actors, individually or jointly, and that they can apply for conducting the activity on behalf of the public sector or in cooperation with local property owners, businesses and the civil sector. It should also be possible for a municipality or public institution, such as a library, to initiate and run Public Offices.

The Public Office may take the form of long-term initiatives, but can also be a temporary spaces which activate and stimulate a location for a shorter period of time. The goal is a diversity of Public Offices, in locally initiated public, private and cross-sectoral modes of operation and financing.
