---
title: The Public Office
layout: document  
category: documents  
author: anders
---

# The Public Office
##a vision of open and rent-free work and meeting places  
Report, project part one

Stockholm June 1, 2012  
English version published July ??

## 1 About the project

### 1.1 Project implementation
The project, Public offices, part one, was initiated and managed by Anders Jacobson and Johan Thelander, Hybris Konstproduktion AB. Meetings were held with a number of players in the fields of cultural policy, public administration, urban development and architecture. Further, discussions with artists, entrepreneurs, academics and students have taken place in open contexts, such as workshops and festivals.

Project duration: 2011-11-01-2012-06-01  
Accountant: Nätverkstan Ekonomitjänst  
Auditor: EMK Revision

Part one of the project was supported by Kulturbryggan.

### 1.2 Purpose and disposition of the report
This report is the result of the first part of the long-term development project Public offices, ran by Hybris Konstproduktion AB.

The report provides a background to the idea of ​​public offices, and discusses it in relation to social issues such as public meeting places and changes in the labor market. The report aims to serve as a basis for the further development of the project, and as a primary reference during the project's second part, which takes place at The Swedish Museum of Architecture in Stockholm, autumn 2012. During this second part, invited guests, such as politicians, civil servants, urban developers, architects, librarians and artists, will use the material to discuss, develop and problematize the concept and test its political viability.

## 2 Public office - a summary

The vision of public offices is comprised by open and rent-free work and meeting places, where citizens are given the opportunity to engage in work and further education. The foundation of the idea is the creation of free and democratically available structures for work, where people's time and competences can be shared and enrich each other.1

The concept of public offices is an infrastructural proposal and a political vision that seeks to meet the changing needs of the labor markets, characterized by a growing number of people working freelance or from their homes, as well as an increased mobility and flexibility in the work. Public offices is a proposal that aims to provide greater security, stability and productive development in relation to these new situations and needs.

One aspect of the increasingly mobile work situation that is rarely addressed adequately, is the widespread "workplacelessness", which means that many people today lack access to the community, stability and skills development that workplaces can offer. This report highlights the opportunities and values ​​that can be generated by creating accessible places where people with different skills and experiences can come together to work alongside each other.

Public spaces for meetings and exchange of knowledge can facilitate new knowledge, contact networks and local communities. Public offices, as a local and diverse meeting place, has the potential to promote business development, improved working conditions, skills development, social inclusion and local development.

This report proposes an organizational model where the public offices are primarily initiated by local players, individually or jointly, and that they can apply for conducting the activity on behalf of the public sector. It should also be possible for a municipality or municipal institution, such as a library, to initiate and run public offices.

The public offices may take the form of long-term initiatives, but can also also be temporary projects that activate and stimulate a location for a shorter period of time. The ways of funding the public offices may vary depending on location and context, but this report suggests that the core funding should be public.

## 3 Starting points and perspectives

### 3.1 Basic starting points
In order to situate the project's ambitions, we'll briefly describe three basic ideological positions that has permeated the work of developing the idea of ​​public offices.

*Cooperation*  
Through cooperative approaches and strategies, we can achieve a more sustainable society. The sharing of resources and knowledge leads to a more efficient, productive and sustainable use of resources. Cooperative approaches have great potential to nurture social and political participation, knowledge and community.

*Commons*  
Social infrastructure that is a prerequisite for equality and democracy should be provided by the public sector. Integration and equality is promoted when people are given equal conditions and opportunities to move, work, meet, access information, healthcare and education.

*Diversity*  
To enable social diversity, many different specific types of activities and locations need to be encouraged, rather than searching for a generic style to fit "all".

### 3.2 Changes in the labor market
The contemporary labor markets are changing, and today there are obvious trends towards a growing proportion of freelance workers, short-term employees and one person firms. People and businesses are now far more geographically mobile than before, and with new communication technologies, work can be done basically at any time and from anywhere.

As a result of this, work is increasingly carried out from homes, in cafes, libraries and so on. This "workplacelessness" means that many people today lack access to the community, stability and skills development of a workplace.1 This situation calls for new types of political analyses and initiatives.

(1 It is difficult to say exactly how widespread the "workplacelessness" is, and according to Statistic Sweden (Statistiska Centralbyrån) and the Work Environment Authority (Arbetsmiljöverket), there are no statistics on the issue.)

In many industries, the long-term employment is a distant memory, and there are significant differences in the securities and benefits between the employee and the entrepreneur. Entrepreneurs are cherished in the political discourse, but there are few substantial efforts to improve the precarious situation that it implies to "do it yourself."

The increased amount of small businesses and freelancers can at best lead to a greater variety of activities and at worst a negative competition that has implications for both quality, working environment and social security.

Running your own business or working freelance, with the flexibility and mobility that it can imply, is for many people a desirable situation. This work situation is often characterized by a strong commitment and a great possibility to influence how, when and where the work is conducted. At the same time, this freedom can lead to more complicated and precarious aspects; uncertainty regarding future missions and income, the feeling of always having to be available, more time spent on administration and budgeting, and a precarious existence in relation to the social security systems.

In this context, we believe that public offices would have a great potential to be stabilizing, strengthening, and productive in many respects. For many people, having a workplace would also make it easier to separate work from personal life; to be able to go to, and leave, a workplace, can contribute to better concentration and efficiency. Another important aspect, is that the public office can provide a common context for people who often feel that they must do everything themselves. There is considerable knowledge and information that is currently lost, that "seeps", in that there are no functioning fora for sharing.

Belonging to a community could be regarded as a prerequisite for building an image of oneself as capable of influencing ones own situation and a larger context. Many freelancers testify to a sense of lack of belonging, and that it is difficult to establish oneself in new environments. This is especially valid for graduates, job seekers, people who have recently arrived in a new country or city, or who for other reasons lack access to relevant networks.

Working side by side, without necessarily working on the same project, is a good way to build skills, exchange information and access feedback, advice and support. In a time when most professionals spend much of their time behind a computer and in digital environments, it is important to stress the significance of spatial community; to take a break together with others, to discuss current issues as well as business and project ideas.

###3.3 Public places and the right to work
In the contemporary welfare state, public spaces are provided, protected or subsidized – places where people can meet, sit down, take a walk, engage in educational and cultural activities etc. – without requiring a financial transaction in a direct sense. These spaces and places form an infrastructure that promotes equal opportunities for knowledge, culture, leisure and mobility.

The public spaces have the potential, through its availability, to create environments where many different types of people can feel welcome. The idea of ​​public offices suggests that the opportunities provided to citizens through The Right of Public Access, public schools, libraries, cultural centers etc., should also cover the spatial and physical aspects of people's working lives, given the development of labor markets and changes in the forms of work outlined above. In this situation, it is relevant to apply formulations of equal rights to work and fair working conditions:

"The right to work is not an unconditional right to a job, but an obligation on states to take measures designed to eliminate unemployment. Everyone has the right to just and favourable conditions of work, including remuneration that is reasonable and sufficient to provide families with an existence worthy of human dignity, and to equal pay for equal work. In addition, everyone should have secure and healthy working conditions and opportunities for promotion." *( See [Right to work www](http://www.manskligarattigheter.se/en/human-rights/what-rights-are-there/right-to-work "Quote from the Swedish government website on Human Rights. Published 17 April 2012, retrieved 12 July 2012") )*

### 3.4 The importance of public meeting places in local development
Many cities and municipalities have realized the need for different types of forums and meeting places, a need that is created in part by the increased mobility of people and businesses. Many municipalities are actively working to identify and develop strategies to create different types of contemporary meeting places. These venues are considered by many to be crucial for developing the local environment and make it more attractive. *( See Mötesplatser i Stockholmsregionen – Rapport 2:2010, published by Regionplanekontoret Stockholms Läns Landsting (Office of Regional Growth, Environment and Planning) 2010. )*

The ability to work in close proximity to one's home could be an argument for city districts and municipalities that want to develop local participation and increase the quality for residents. In the longer term, public offices could thereby help to reduce the currently increasing commuting, thus reducing environmental impact.

The urban environment needs different types of milieus that create conditions for meetings and social interaction. Since the working life of many people today is characterized by social interaction and professional networking, it seems relevant to develop accessible, social meeting places for work. The public offices could thus also help people and businesses who are new to a city or city district, to more quickly find contexts and make connections.

Many municipalities and city districts are working hard to attract businesses and companies to establish themselves there. A structure of public offices is in this respect based on the use of the flows and activities that already exist. In most neighborhoods, there is most likely a large number of entrepreneurs, businesses, cultural workers, NGOs and activities that are not visible, because the work is carried out in homes or in cafes. Local public offices would thus provide a form that can be filled by existing local businesses, which in turn would stimulate the local environment by becoming visible, by coming together, and by interacting.

## 4 The vision of public offices

### 4.1 What is a public office work in practice?
A public office is an open and rent-free work and meeting place in which citizens are given the opportunity to engage in work and further education.

The foundation of public offices consists of a site with free access to a workplace and internet access, electricity and access to basic office equipment. Separate meeting rooms and computers on loan can be reserved free of charge. The public office can be used for a regular or temporary work.

The public offices have one or more employees, who welcomes and introduces users to the site and its functions.

Print, copy, phone and fax are provided against payment. Access to lockers, mobile drawer units or storage spaces, can be provided against payment or deposit.

In direct connection to the public office there should be a staffed cafe where the user can pause, socialize and make connections. The cafe can be run in cooperation with existing local cafes, bakeries and so on.
Opening hours are proposed to be 8:00 to 22:00 on weekdays and 10:00 to 18:00 on weekends.

### 4.2 User groups
Since the public offices are proposed to be public spaces, they are by definition open to all. The analysis underlying the proposal is essentially based on the increased proportion of freelance and precarious workers, and a vision of social inclusion through workplace communality. We have earlier in the report discussed the ways in which public offices would constitute a support for freelance workers, short term employees and entrepreneurs. In this section, we discuss other user groups that would also benefit from public offices. The great potential in terms of users, is precisely the possibility of diversity.

People with employment working flexible hours or from home may find important values in having access to a nearby site dedicated to work, and in the opportunity to meet other people.

Being unemployed and looking for work involves a lot of administration. For job seekers, being in an environment where others are working could have motivational effects, while at the same time offering practical opportunities to establish new professional contacts and develop one's professional skills. Public offices could thus be able to reduce the segregation implied in being outside of the labor market.

NGO's and nonprofit associations are important parts of a local community. Conducting social and nonprofit activities involves work requiring professional knowledge and a relevant work situation. Allowing social, nonprofit or NGO activities coexist with with other professional and commercial activities should have positive effects on the level of knowledge and exchange of ideas, as well as regarding participation in civil society. The local civil society is also a fundamental factor in developing and spreading a greater local and democratic engagement within a community, and public offices would put this commitment into contact with other types of activities in a natural way.

People who study can be enriched by coexisting in professional environments. Furthermore, it would be beneficial to students' future establishment – or parallel activities – on the labor market.

Homeless people need to regularly be in contact with authorities, have opportunities for job training, as well as access to meaningful activities and community. In this respect, public offices can function as a welcoming place for people who otherwise are excluded from professional environments and social contexts in which they can meet active people. The open commons that the public offices constitute are proposing that the community needs more spaces in which people from different community groups can coexist, see each other, and interact.

People of all ages are engaged in various types of projects, look for information, and thrive in the company of others. In many respects, our contemporary society is suffering from a strong age segregation. Many pensioners testifies to the great shift in self-image that it may imply to suddenly not have a job to go to, and are experiencing a sudden lack of context. Similarly, active young people are often directed to exclusively youth-related activities, such as sports or youth centers. Public offices have the potential to be a space where people of different ages can stay together when they want to undertake projects, discussions or daily administration.

### 4.3 Ownership forms and guidelines
In order to achieve a variety of environments, activities and approaches, we advocate a mix in terms of forms of organization and modes of operation.

We believe it is important that policy-makers encourage and welcome initiatives where independent players are mandated to design and run activities, such as public offices. Our proposed basic model is that the public offices are run by local players, individually or jointly, and that they can apply for conducting the activity on behalf of the public sector. The operators form and develop activities based on an analysis of the local contextual needs and possibilities.

It should also be possible for a local government and municipal institutions, such as libraries and culture centers, to initiate and run public offices, as well as for example property and housing companies. In most cases it should be possible and beneficial to find forms of cooperation between local actors from civil society, NGO's, businesses, property companies and municipal services.

*Suggested guidelines*

* the public offices shall respect human rights, and strive for equal opportunities for all user groups and individuals
* basic access and activities shall be free of charge, open to the public and not restricted to certain groups
* the openness of the site is regulated, similar to libraries, through clarifications on respectful conduct, such as prohibition against discrimination, violence, threats, drugs and alcohol
* activities are to be designed in close dialogue with the local civil society, businesses and cultural life, and the site's users shall be offered opportunities to make proposals for activities and functions – the public offices shall have staff with the capacity and skills to welcome and assist users, and who are able to evaluate and develop the daily operations and business form
* premises must be suitable for persons with disabilities
* activities shall be designed according to to local needs and opportunities, and engage in context specific efforts to ensure both general accessibility and exchange, as well as a good working environment
* activities shall at every level, consider aspects of sustainable development and long term use of resources
* diversity of staff and decision-making bodies should be sought; in terms of sex, gender identity or gender expression, ethnicity, religion or creed, culture, functionality, sexual orientation and age
* the public offices are to facilitate and help all users to meet, support and allow each other to use the site and its functions.

### 4.4 Forms of funding
How each individual public office should be financed, would probably come to take different forms, but the idea is based on the existence of a public commitment that enables the operation. In some places it will be possible to make revenues, set up local partnerships with businesses, etc.. We also see opportunities for housing companies and property owners to be interested in leasing premises inexpensive or lending them for free during periods of time, while other situations will require a comprehensive public funding support.

This means that the proposal, to achieve a broad impact, requires a political situation where financial support for public offices can be applied for, in a similar manner as activity support for cultural businesses. The support structures need – to a greater extent than is currently the case for cultural activities – to guarantee a serious advance long term planning to secure professional operation.

Reasonably, the primary financial responsibility should be placed on local/municipal authorities, with support from the state policy level. It is also possible to envisage that the project is initiated from the state level, in the form of an governmental investigation or an official commission of cooperation between relevant authorities and agencies.

### 4.5 Form and content of the activities
The aim is that the different public offices in total can provide a variety of environments that can attract different user groups, and in this regard it is important to grant the offices a significant degree of freedom to develop specificities.

The activities should be rooted in local and context-specific needs and opportunities. Some public offices may have regularly organized activities, and conduct specific activities based on an analysis of the context, while other offices may invite users to self-organize events such as
lectures, reading groups, etc.. In some contexts it may also be advantageous to coexist with, or host, other types of activities run by local players, such as clothing and tool libraries, free stores, networking initiatives and so on.

The idea of public offices is essentially about taking advantage of existing flows and resources; people's movements in a specific area, entrepreneurs and employees working separately in their homes, the voluntary sector and municipal activities. We therefore see an advantage for local development if a substantial share of the public office employees and decision-making groups etc., are resident in the area. This is to promote stronger local ties as well as to facilitate encounters between different cultural groups in a particular area.

## 5 Suggestions for forms of operation

In this section we discuss three main suggestions for forms of operation.

### 5.1 Establishment of public offices as a new institution
Public offices can be established as new local institutions in urban development projects. Where residential and commercial buildings are planned, public offices can be included to increase the area's appeal as a workplace and living environment. The forms of this planning can be achieved through cooperation between the municipality, the urban developer, housing companies, local civil society and businesses, existing libraries or cultural institutions, and so on.

The offices should not require new or specific buildings, but may, for example, be planned on the ground floor of a new block of flats or in other types of available spaces.

### 5.2 Use of temporarily availible spaces
Public offices can be housed in places that are empty for a period of time. In many cities there are sites of various size and function that remain unused for a number of years, awaiting a new tenant, renovation or political decisions.

This strategy, using the unused spaces, has great potential especially in terms of using existing resources and activating sites that might otherwise spread a sense of desolation and decay. This strategy proposes that also temporary initiatives may have positive and long-term impact on a neighborhood and its inhabitants.

Some unused sites would probably need renovation in order to accommodate a public space for work, but the solution as a whole should be beneficial for both the users, property owners and local communities. We therefore consider the proposal of accommodating public offices in temporarily unused spaces to be promising for a wide range of stakeholders to invest in.

###5.3 Expansion of the mandate of existing institutions
Since many aspirations and approaches regarding public offices coincides with the public libraries, there is reason to look into possibilities of incorporating public offices in the library structure. To some extent, libraries are already offering places to work and study. However, we believe that the public offices need a greater volume and a specific architecture and structure to provide an effective public workplace.

According to this proposal, the public libraries would be granted an extended mandate; to house public offices adjacent to the existing library spaces. In practical terms, this could mean that libraries receive support to expand or develop their facilities and operations. Existing structures for library cards, internet access and user information administration can also be used by the public offices.

It is also possible to envisage that public offices could be housed in other types of public cultural institutions; culture centers, performing arts venues, museums and so on. Public cultural institutions, especially the ones devoted to the performing arts, tend to have big surfaces, such as foyers, used only at certain times of the day, that could be activated to a much greater extent.

## 6 Public offices as a political issue
As a political issue, we believe that public offices primarily covers the following policy areas:

*Labor*

Public offices have great potential to become a concrete initiative towards job creation and networking, as well as for professional learning and skills development. As the opportunities to work are increasingly becoming dependent on social structures and informal networks, the public offices, forming an infrastructure of public workplaces, is an effort to democratize opportunities for work. As public workplaces, the public offices also have the opportunity to become part of greater integration support initiatives and processes.

*Culture*

It is a generally accepted political description that players in the arts, culture and the creative industries produce important values ​​– economic as well as social and cultural –, constituting a cornerstone in the descriptions of knowledge and creativity as future markets. *( See David Karlsson, En kulturutredning: pengar konst och politik (David Karlsson & Glänta Produktion 2010 p. 101) )*  
However, there are political inconsistencies in how this thesis operates in practice, since few substantial – in relation to the magnitude of the matter – political actions are made to strengthen the "creative core" of the creative industries theories, ie. the artists and cultural workers. Public offices would be a tangible and productive effort to strengthen the working conditions and development opportunities of artists and cultural entrepreneurs.

*Business*

Public offices have great potential to make positive impacts on businesses, as "scattered" competencies and energies can meet, interact and be shared. There are many contexts in which individuals alone do the same big work, or depend on personal contacts with people who "know". This often involves different forms of information navigation, such as information about taxes, budgeting, employer liability, billing, procedures when applying for business development support and cultural support, searching for relevant business contacts and so on. When people with different skills work in the same space, these support processes are helped considerably. Further, the public offices are expected to constitute a creative and heterogenous environment that should be able to create added value for local businesses as well as raising the knowledge levels regarding entrepreneurship.

*Education*

One of the fundamental ideas of the public offices is to enable cooperative knowledge processes. We don't primarily expect that all users will cooperate and spontaneously co-organize different events, but co-working with other people and a work community permits an organic professional development in terms of human resources and proximity to other knowledge, experiences and networks.

### 6.1 The issue of competition with existing companies and businesses
The idea of ​​public offices have met questions and comments regarding competition problems. A criticism sometimes brought forward, is that the public offices would make it difficult for existing players who rents out work spaces on a commercial basis.
The conclusion of this report, regarding the question of possible distortions of competition, is that all types of public investment affects, facilitates and interacts with different markets. In the end, these are political decisions concerning which infrastructure the community should provide all citizens.

## 7 The continuation of the project; Public offices, part two

The next part of the Public offices project takes place in November 2012, in cooperation with the The Swedish Museum of Architecture in Stockholm. During five weeks, a project space in the museum will function as a public office. The room is thus open to the public, and those who come to use the office are welcome to work independently or in groups, study, organize lectures, conversations, exchange ideas, make contacts and so on.

The site becomes a base for our further work on the concept of public offices, along with invited guests and interested users. We will invite politicians and civil servants, researchers, architects, city planners, artists and representatives of libraries and housing companies. The project period will include lectures, discussions, think tanks, reading groups and meetings, which will explore the concept's potential and political viability.

The project's second part is invited to be part of the EU project Special Issue, with partners in France, Serbia, Spain and Turkey. Special Issue focuses on the publication of discursive practices in the arts sector, and is coordinated by Les Laboratoires d'Aubervillier, Paris.

Project manager for part two is Johan Thelander.
